.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, before:

Provide a general summary of your changes in the **Title** above.

### Important
Mark with [x] to select. Leave as [ ] to unselect.

### Motivation and Context
- [ ] Why is this change required? What problem does it solve?
- [ ] If it fixes an open issue, include the text `Closes #1` (where 1 would be the issue number) to your commit message.

### Types of changes
What types of changes does your code introduce? Check all the boxes that apply:
- [ ] Bug fix (non-breaking change which fixes an issue)
- [ ] New feature (non-breaking change which adds functionality)
- [ ] Breaking change (fix or feature that would cause existing functionality to change)

### Description
- [ ] Describe your changes in detail.

### Final checklist:
Go over all the following points and check all the boxes that apply  
If you're unsure about any of these, don't hesitate to ask. We're here to help!
- [ ] My code follows the code style of this project.
- [ ] My change requires a change to the documentation.
- [ ] I have updated the documentation accordingly.
- [ ] I have read the [**CONTRIBUTING**](./CONTRIBUTING.md) guidelines.

Commit message:

Updated PRs template with help guidelines, referencing #2628

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, after:

Provide a general summary of your changes in the **Title** above.

### Important
Mark with [x] to select. Leave as [ ] to unselect.

### Motivation and Context
- [ ] Why is this change required? What problem does it solve?
- [ ] If it fixes an open issue, include the text `Closes #1` (where 1 would be the issue number) to your commit message.

### Types of changes
What types of changes does your code introduce? Check all the boxes that apply:
- [ ] Bug fix (non-breaking change which fixes an issue)
- [ ] New feature (non-breaking change which adds functionality)
- [ ] Breaking change (fix or feature that would cause existing functionality to change)

### Description
- [ ] Describe your changes in detail.

### Final checklist:
Go over all the following points and check all the boxes that apply. 
If you're unsure about any of these, don't hesitate to ask. We're here to help! Various areas of the codebase have been worked on by different people in recent years, so if you are unfamiliar with the general area you're working in, please feel free to chat with people who have experience in that area. See the list [here](https://github.com/fontforge/fontforge/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#people-to-ask).
- [ ] My code follows the code style of this project.
- [ ] My change requires a change to the documentation.
- [ ] I have updated the documentation accordingly.
- [ ] I have read the [**CONTRIBUTING**](./CONTRIBUTING.md) guidelines.
